\documentclass[11pt]{article}
\usepackage{fontspec}
\setmainfont[Ligatures={Common,TeX}]{Palatino}
\usepackage{url}
\usepackage{parskip}
\usepackage{natbib}
\bibpunct{(}{)}{;}{a}{,}{,}
\usepackage{titles}

\begin{document}

\begin{titlepage}
\title{Notes on Plato's \book{Euthyphro}}
\author{Peter Aronoff}
\date{April 2013}
\maketitle
\end{titlepage}

\section{Characters and setting}

\subsection{Characters}

The dialogue is a conversation between Socrates and Euthyphro.  They run
into each other outside the office of the (so--called) king archon (ἡ τοῦ
βασιλέως στοά).  Both men are there because they have court cases before
the king archon.

Euthyphro appears to be the same person mentioned in \book{Charmides}
396a2--b1 and 396d2--e3.\footnote{\citet{burnet1924} 85 and
\citet{bailly2003} 16.}  He knows Socrates reasonably well, and he is very
surprised to see Socrates at court at all.  When Socrates explains that he's
being charged with corruption of the youth and religious crimes, Euthyphro
assumes that Socrates' \foreign{daimonion}\footnote{For a complete list of
references to the \foreign{daimonion}, see \citet{bailly2003} 32.}
is the reason.  Perhaps partly because of the \foreign{daimonion}, he sees
Socrates as a kindred spirit: Euthyphro views himself as a prophet and an
expert on religious matters.  Other Athenians, according to Euthyphro, view
both Socrates and Euthyphro as unusual because of their religious beliefs.
Other than the two Platonic dialogues, we have no other evidence about
Euthyphro.\footnote{\citet{bailly2003} 16.}

\subsection{Setting}

Because the king archon was responsible for various state religious
functions, he also oversaw certain trials~--- namely those that had to do
with religion.\footnote{\citet{burnet1924} 82--83.}  That's why both
Socrates and Euthyphro need to see him in particular.  It seems that
Euthyphro has already finished with the king archon since at the end of the
dialogue he runs off.\footnote{\citet{burnet1924} 82.}

The prosecutor\footnote{This word is somewhat misleading.  In ancient
Athens, a prosecutor was a private citizen, not someone who worked for the
state.  Only individuals could start a court case, whether civil or
criminal.} and the defendant met the king archon twice before the trial.
The first meeting was very preliminary.  The prosecutor gave the defendent
a written version of the charge and paid a fee.\footnote
{\citet{brickhouse2004} 7--8.}  The second meeting with the king archon was
the \foreign{anakrisis}.  The \foreign{anakrisis} was more elaborate. The
defendant entered a formal plea, and both sides answered questions about the
case from the king archon.  At the end of this meeting the king archon
decided whether or not to send the case forward to trial.\footnote
{\citet{burnet1924} 82--83 and \citet{brickhouse2004} 8.}

\section{Preliminaries (2a--4a3)}

\subsection{Socrates' case (2a--3e7)}

Euthyphro is shocked to see Socrates at court and asks who is prosecuting
him and what the trial is about.  (He assumes that Socrates is the
defendant and not the prosecutor.)  Socrates says that Meletus is the
prosecutor, and they spend a few minutes not knowing who he is.  Then
Socrates tells Euthyphro the charges: harming the young men via religious
impiety.  Socrates first discusses harming the youth.  He claims to find
Meletus admirable because he is so concerned for the youth of the city, as
a politician should be.  However, Socrates is openly confused by the charge
that he is not irreligious.  He describes that part of the charges as
strange (ἄτοπα 3b1), but he does clarify that the specifics of that part of
the charge are (1) that he introduces new gods and (2) that he does not
believe in the gods of Athens.

Euthyphro immediately assocates the first part of the irreligion charge
with Socrates' \foreign{daimonion}.  He expresses sympathy with Socrates,
and says that people always laugh at and mock him too, when he offers
prophecy in public meetings.  Socrates notes that there's a big difference
between being laughed at and a trial for your life.

\subsection{Euthyphro's case (3e8-4e3)}

Moving on to Euthyphro's case, Euthyphro seems somewhere between coy and
proud of his case.\footnote{\citet{geach1966} 369 takes Euthyphro to be
embarrassed and reluctant to admit who he is prosecuting.  Bailly on the
other hand \citeyearpar{bailly2003} 37 sees him as ``cavalier and cocky".
\citet{nehamas1975} 290 describes Euthyphro best as ``sensitive, touchy,
and, in a slightly perverse way, proud."}  However that may be, Euthyphro is
prosecuting his father for the murder of a hired hand. The details are such
that (1) there is room to doubt whether the crime was really murder or
simply manslaughter with callous indifference and (2) many Athenians would
feel that Euthyphro was wrong to pursue the case no matter what.  For such
people, Euthyphro is completely out of order (1) to prosecute his father no
matter what and (2) to prosecute in a murky case like this when the deceased
was himself a murderer and a hired hand.  The disapproval from such people
leads Euthyphro to make the assertion that opens him up to Socratic elenchus:

\begin{quote}
    ἀνόσιον γὰρ εἶναι τὸ ὑιὸν πατρὶ φόνου ἐπεξιέναι· κακῶς εἰδότες,
    ὦ Σώκρατες, τὸ θεῖον ὡς ἔχει τοῦ ὁσίου τε πέρι καὶ τοῦ ἀνοσίου
    (4d9-4e2).

    For [they think] that it is impious for a son to prosecute his father
    for murder. But, Socrates, they understand poorly how the divine stands
    concerning piety and impiety.
\end{quote}

Euthyphro strongly implies here that he believes that \emph{he} does
understand piety and impiety, and this is what Socrates will latch on to
and question.

\section{Definitions (4e3--15c10)}

\subsection{Pre-definition methodology 4e3--5d7}

Socrates says that he should become Euthyphro's student in order to answer
the charges against him. There is certainly \emph{some} irony here, though
not everyone would agree on how to interpret it.

Without getting too far into the irony wars, I'll just say this. My take is
that the primary irony is a form of dramatic irony, and the source of the
irony is not so much Socrates as Plato. That is, the author Plato is
ironically suggesting to the reader that Euthyphro the character is likely
to become yet another victim of Socrates: he begins with confident
assertion, but we expect him to end in \foreign{aporia}.  By focusing on
Plato and his readers, rather than on Socrates the character or Socrates
the person, I think that we can avoid the nightmare of trying to decide
whether or not Socrates is sincere.

In any case, Socrates lays out the formal question he wants answered at
5c8ff.

\begin{quote}
    νῦν οὖν πρὸς Διὸς λέγε μοι ὃ νυνδὴ σαφῶς εἰδέναι διισχθρίζου, ποῖόν τι
    τὸ εὐσεβὲς φῂς εἶναι καὶ τὸ ἀσεβὲς καὶ περὶ φόνου καὶ περὶ τῶν ἄλλων;
    ἢ οὐ ταὐτόν ἐστιν ἐν πάσῃ πράξει τὸ ὅσιον αὐτὸ αὑτῷ, καὶ τὸ ἀνόσιον αὖ
    τοῦ μὲν ὁσίου παντὸς ἐναντίον, αὐτὸ δὲ αὑτῷ ὅμοιον καὶ ἔχον μίαν τινὰ
    ἰδέαν κατὰ τὴν ἀνοσιότητα πᾶν ὅτιπερ ἂν μέλλῃ ἀνόσιον εἶναι;

    Therefore now, by Zeus, tell me what you were just now confidently
    asserting that you knew clearly: What sort of thing do you say is the
    holy and the unholy, both concerning murder and concerning everything
    else? Or isn't the pious the same thing in every activity, itself to
    itself and the impious in turn opposite of every pious, but itself the
    same as itself and having some single form insofar as impiety,
    everything which will be impious?
\end{quote}

My translation is neither beautiful nor especially clear, but as far as
that goes, it closely resembles the Greek. In this passage Socrates lays
out a number of conditions that he wants Euthyphro's definition to meet.

\begin{itemize}
    \item The definition should be universal. However Euthyphro defines
        pious, that definition should cover both murder and everything else
        (5d1). Piety should be ``the same in every activity" (5d1).
    \item The two terms \word{piety} and \word{impiety} should be
        opposites (5d2). This seems to suggest that they should
        \emph{exclude} one another, perhaps?
    \item Piety and impiety should ``have some single kind"\footnote{Many
        people get hot and bothered because Plato uses the word ἰδέα
        (\foreign{idea}), and this is one of his terms for \word{Form}
        in its technical sense.  Most scholars assume that this dialogue
        precedes the full theory of forms, so this use causes some anguish.
        See \citet{burnet1924} 111.} (5d4) inasmuch as they are what they
        are.\footnote{I'm unsure whether this third condition is really a
        restatement of the first or a new point.}
\end{itemize}

Note that the universality that Socrates demands here is \emph{not}
primarily a matter of words. He's not looking to legislate or to discover
how we talk about things. We can be sure of that because in this very
passage, he happily uses two different sets of opposed terms for what he
wants defined: \foreign{eusebes} versus \foreign{asebes} and
\foreign{hosion} versus \foreign{anhosion}.

Although the confidence of Euthyphro's response may surprise us, it is
characteristic of similar moments in other dialogues. Euthyphro immediately
answers ``Absolutely" (Πάντως δήπου, 5d6). We might have expected him to
ask ``Huh?" or at least to request clarification from Socrates.\footnote
{\citet{nehamas1975} 303.}  However, Euthyphro's answer is unsurprisingly
in the light of other Platonic dialogues. As John Burnet says:

\begin{quote}
    Euthyphro appears to be quite familiar with the terminology used by
    Socrates, and accepts it without demur.  That becomes all the more
    striking when we find him boggling later at much more elementary
    things.  Plato always represents the matter in this way.  No one ever
    hesitates for a moment when Socrates talks of ἰδέαι and εἴδη, and
    Socrates never finds it necessary to explain the terms.\footnote
    {\citet{burnet1924} 112.}
\end{quote}

Similarly, Alexander Nehamas writes:

\begin{quote}
    [I]t is notorious that Socrates' interlocutors (even Meno) are quite
    willing to answer affirmatively...On this view, the existence of
    universals is taken for granted in the Socratic dialogues.\footnote
    {\citet{nehamas1975} 303--304.}
\end{quote}

Scholars disagree about many things here:

\begin{itemize}
    \item Why do the interlocutors agree so easily?
    \item What do they think they're agreeing to?
    \item If they understand what Socrates wants, why do they do so poorly
        at satisfying his demands?
\end{itemize}

\section{Conclusion (15c11--16a4)}

\bibliographystyle{apa}
\bibliography{plato}

\end{document}
